[Music]
so i think wealth is an attitude if you
feel like you're so happy and so content
with what you have you are already
wealthy but if you have uh
uh you have if you have to struggle
every day
and you cannot find happiness
either in your business or in personal
life i think you're not wealthy even if
you have billions in your bank account
hey everybody welcome to impact theory
today's guest is best-selling author ken
honda an international phenomenon
trained by the warren buffett of japan
he's written more than 50 books on
personal finance and sold more than 7
million copies worldwide his work
bridges the gap between money management
and self-development and he's the first
person from japan to be inducted into
the transformational leadership council
by putting his own theories into
practice he was able to retire at just
29 and now spends his time writing
speaking and publishing on what he's
learned about money and human nature and
helping people develop a healthy and
sustainable relationship with their
finances regardless of the economy ken
welcome to the show man thank you tom i
feel so honored to be here it's early in
the morning and you're in the evening
and this is more fun doing this dude i
love that man and um yeah so you're
obviously in japan right now for anybody
uh wondering so time zones for us are
very very different um but really
excited and one thing i wanted to talk
about is that like how much of what
you're doing do you think is uniquely
japanese
i
i have been to a lot of places in the
world and there are few places where i
felt the cultural difference more
palpably than in tokyo and i'm just
curious how much that has influenced the
way that you think about money you know
as you said my mentors have been
teaching me so many things about money
but from very different perspectives
mostly from zen approach
so it's not
western people tend to think that i need
more money to be happy but instead then
approach is how can you find
satisfaction in what you have so it's
not a matter of how much money you make
or how much money you have it's more
about your attitude toward money and the
relationship you have with money
gives you happiness or miserable life so
you really have to be careful with what
you have
what are some of the tenets of zen so i
studied zen i got really hardcore into
taoism when i was younger like way
hardcore
which led me then to studying buddhism i
would definitely never claim to say that
i practiced it but studied buddhism
a fair amount
zen i found maybe the most intriguing
but confusing what are some of the like
core tenants of zen
so um
i had this opportunity to meet my mentor
later on uh his name is wahed takeda
so when i asked him to teach about money
he said his first lesson is forget about
money so i'm so confused yeah one of the
things that i found super confusing and
people so the where i was going is the
notion of a zen cohen and this is
something that people probably in the us
anyway be tangentially familiar with the
most famous one we talk about is what is
the sound of one hand clapping um and
there are many zen cones which are like
beyond confusing and of course the idea
is once you understand sort of the
absurdity of the question itself
and of course i'm i'm doing this from a
logical perspective and zen is i think
meant to be very different than that but
um just to give people an anchor point
once you understand the absurdity of the
question then it's like you're a step
closer to enlightenment um
so when he said forget about money what
was he
what was he trying to get you to like
what does that mean because obviously
it's not truly forget that it exists yes
so what does he mean so i think he meant
about where i focus
because if you want money you have to
forget about money you have to forget
about what you can give to other people
how much service you can give out to the
world and then you receive money
so he was telling me not to focus on
money because money is the end result of
what we get after serving the world
so instead of focusing on what you get
you have to really focus on what you
give
and and and our life is in the middle of
giving and receiving so unless we
receive well unless we we give well we
can receive
so we are in the cycle of appreciation
or or resentment
either cycle you're in
your life exists
so if you start appreciating your life
about everything including money your
life will be filled with money and
appreciation if your life will be filled
with resentment anger and fear
around money and also around life your
life will be also surrounded by life
fear and resentment and anxiety so he
taught me
how to focus instead of
just getting the end result of money and
he was very well respected because he
was talking about philanthropy so i'm
teaching about happiness and money ever
since
yeah that the idea that he's been so
incredibly successful obviously lends a
lot of credence um to the things that he
says and one of the things that i wanted
to understand better about his teachings
to you and your teachings you've written
so prolifically
what what is it like
how does it get that big how does the
topic sort of expand so far what is it
that people are getting wrong and what
are some of the like universal
principles that are going to lead people
to
um
i'll say wealth and it's probably worth
defining how would you define wealth and
then we'll go back to those two
questions
in my mind wealth is uh an emotion
you know it doesn't really matter how
much you have how much you make
because i've interviewed over the course
of my career i've interviewed many
millionaires and billionaires and some
of them are very unhappy and very upset
with everything i'm sure you've met some
happy ones and very unhappy ones
so
and also among the people
who are struggling with life there are
also happy people and unhappy people so
i think wealth is an attitude if you
feel like you're so happy and so content
with what you have you are already
wealthy but if you have uh
uh you have if you have to struggle
every day
and you cannot find happiness um either
in your business or in personal life i
think you're not wealthy even if you
have billions in your bank account
but that doesn't mean that you don't
have to have money
that's what i like about your approach
is there there is a recognition so part
of the reason that i think that people
continue to strive for money um i live
the nightmare of money can't buy you
happiness i had heard a thousand people
tell me that money wasn't going to buy
me happiness that you know pursuing
money outright was going to end up being
a problem and i still had to do it and
when i ran into the wall of oh really
truly money cannot buy you happiness how
is it that i ended up here when all the
people told me that this was going to be
the outcome why did i have to walk this
path like why couldn't i just
accept their wisdom and i realized that
one of the things that people don't talk
about is that money really is powerful
money is you call it energy
i'll call it power like money gives you
the ability to close your eyes imagine
something that you want to create and
then open your eyes and actually be able
to do it and if you have the skill set
of course yeah and so there there's real
utility in money and when people talk
about in and i've heard you say before i
don't want to get too spiritual like i
want to keep this grounded and i think
that that's really important because if
you tell people hey forget about money
because money doesn't matter there's
going to be a turn off but if you tell
people hey forget about money because
it's going to reorient your mindset it's
going to change your behaviors
it's going to align your behaviors to
something that's actually going to
allow you to generate actual money
then i think that it draws people in a
little bit more so with that context i
want to go back to the two questions so
what are the mistakes that people make
and what are some universal things
people need to understand if they
actually want to
be wealthy in the way that you just
defined
so i think most of us
the biggest problem i think especially
today
is that we are so afraid of money and so
as much as we want money we are so
scared of it so uh why do you say that i
think that that hit me is very
counterintuitive why why do you think
people are scared of money it's because
of a money trauma i call it money wounds
that we we've had
since our childhood we used to have some
uh unless your parents are perfect and
unfortunately it's not the case in in
any any culture
so we've been scolded about money you
know we spend too much we wasted the
money or we denied a corrected lesson or
soccer lesson or a ballet lesson or
piano lessons because it's expensive as
some of my friends were taught you are
not worth it well that's like that's a
big blow so uh we've been denied so many
times around money so that's why
as much as we want money because we feel
uh money can buy happiness so money
money can buy at least freedom but at
the same times money
have been abused abused us for so many
ways so as much as we want to get close
to it but if we get too close to it we
get burns or like hurt so
for a lot of people money is a mystery
person
so how do they begin to change that
relationship i'm assuming some of this
is going to be just narrative around how
they talk to themselves about money what
do you advise people you have to start
watching your your language
my mother used to say that
and then
around money especially
a lot of people say like you know i was
ripped off so there are so many negative
uh language around money
and um my mentor has said you have to
use positive words around money
otherwise money will not like you
and i really i thought it's very cute
you know and then uh
in my book i talk about
what if uh if if money were a person who
would it be like is that a person a
gentle person or hungry person so just
um you know
you have to pay attention to how you
relate to money uh if you just um
feel like money is just a thing like you
don't care but if you don't care
you know you end up being in debt so you
have to be very careful and respectful
for money uh for some japanese people
actually one of my students
made futon in a bed for a wallet
it's it's so cute
to show respect you know why i rest
please money and credit cards please
rest here too so it's like a little bed
like like a cat cat bed
and then you're supposed to put your
wallet into the bed so it's just a
metaphor but
unless you show respect to money and uh
the money coming in money going out both
ways
you cannot really feel you cannot feel
peaceful around money especially
uh
this hard time of economy you have to
really
um pay close attention to your emotions
and most of us are so controlled by
anxiety and fear and money that's why do
things which are now really true to us
to in order to survive so we feel like
uh if we have no money we cannot survive
that means your death so uh the funny
switch is turned on uh it's i think it's
a survival mechanism um you know 200
years ago or 300 years ago everybody was
a farmer nobody's
you know probably don't use much money
but
now unless you have money you you cannot
buy food so money and survival are so
tight in your system
so as people begin to
tell themselves a new narrative they
build the futon bed for their wallet
they think about who that person is
and they i'm guessing a lot of people
are gonna think of that person as
abusive or
um
you know
they wander off and they don't have a
good relationship with that so how do
they begin to change their mindset
around that how do they begin to
turn that narrative do you do you tell
them to imagine somebody who is kind or
gentle
what is that process
so
since we we've been abused we feel like
we've been abused by this person we're a
little scared of this person right so i
think the first step is actually the
step that my mentor takeda taught me
that is arigato your money
thank you money when money comes in
either by in a form of government check
or a salary or commission or whatever
the money you receive
you say thank you arigato thank you
money for coming in
because in these days it's so so rare to
find you and then and pay you somebody
pays you right it either could be
government or your husband wife or your
clients
there are so many other people who do
the similar job
that you do but they chose you to pay
you so like there are millions of
reasons to appreciate for the money so
when money comes in just say
thank you or arigato or danke or
whatever your language or mercy you know
and
and then when you spend money
also arigato you know because you're
getting something for the money
and wahey said arigato in arigato out
so it's almost like a karate kid
teaching you know what sing walks out so
he said uh arigato and arigato ao if you
do it for two months and then come back
so like i wanted to have some stock tips
or like investment tips or i expected
something different but
the the thing i got is arigato and i got
to out and i practiced for two months
and i felt genuinely happier
so i recommend anybody
uh you know
just try it at least because it doesn't
cost you anything
and once you start appreciating money
coming in money going out you'll start
appreciating about other things so this
uh my arigato and arigato out opens a
door
to a new life which is full of
appreciation
and i think we definitely need that uh
wahe said appreciation melts fear and
anxiety
so if you start and if you keep
appreciating money coming and going out
you cannot worry about money at the same
time because a human mind can focus one
thing at the time so why he has a very
interesting unique trick
uh of um
so like changing
why or
in their brain so once you start
appreciating
it's so funny because one of my students
said oh gee ken i forgot to worry about
money for a week
because you folk focus on appreciation
yeah i think this is really powerful is
is a very important first step and when
i think about my own journey um
i won't say that i had a negative view
about money and if you had asked me to
describe what money was i probably would
have whoever i could think of that was
like glamorous and exciting and powerful
like that was my vision of money which
is why i was chasing it so hard
[Music]
ultimately coming to understand okay i'm
making more money than i've ever made
but i'm not happier than i've ever been
and the neurochemistry that i want to
feel like this is not taking me there
and so i began to what
what i began to do was change my
behavior so i changed my story about
money that what i flipped over into was
the only thing that matters is feeling
alive so i'm going to stop chasing money
i'm going to start thinking about value
and so i had a very negative connotation
around money and i just said look i'm
going to set that aside for now and i'm
just going to pursue
fulfillment i'm going to do things to
add value to people's lives i'm going to
work to improve myself that was a huge
part for me was always wanting to get
better myself
and what i found was i needed both i
needed a change of mindset i needed to
stop thinking money was going to solve
my problems but i also needed to change
my behaviors and ultimately i don't i no
one is ever going to think their way to
success
i think that
you're you you have to think in a new
way that is advantageous but you have to
act in a new way that's advantageous so
after you know when you do the wax on
wax off like eventually we do find
ourselves in a karate tournament and we
really do have to fight yes so what does
that look like especially now in this
crazy economy that we're going through
right now
let's get let's go to that next phase so
people are they're already arigato money
in arigato money out they've got the
futon for their wallet like they're in a
zen place like they're doing good
now
like you retired at 29 not just because
you were thinking you retired at 29
because you ran businesses you got very
thoughtful about how to generate money
and save it um how should people be
acting with their money so we get now
how they should be thinking but how
should they be acting with their money
thank you tom i think it's a beautiful
question and i i think that's exactly
what we need to learn
um but because
once you start appreciating your life
shifts too
for example one of the readers on my
book
she was a single mom
with a low paying job she was working as
a secretary and then she came to me and
she used to complain about
her low paying job but after reading my
book she
changed her attitude and she started
appreciating about life and boss and and
she realized that she didn't have a
college degree
but she got she was hired as a secretary
so that's a big reason to appreciate her
boss
before she was always complaining about
him
and i think the feeling really probably
came across to uh his uh her boss and
she got a big raise uh in a few weeks
so once you start appreciating i i've
heard so many stories i can even write
few books on this
once you start appreciating your boss
your clients
they appreciate you back so
in my 20s the reason why i i was
successful was i was little unique
in so many different different things
for example when i was doing accounting
consulting i divided my
clients to two groups one i do regular
job the other i always bring something
whenever i got to meet them just a herb
tea japanese tea like a book or just not
super expensive
so in six months i got so many referrals
from
the the gift giving groups you know i
didn't ask for any clients right but
they gave me uh so many referrals and
the second you know a group uh not so
much so i
recommend everybody to start giving more
uh something a little extra nuts like 30
more but something to to show
appreciation and
uh it doesn't really matter if you're a
florist or cleaners or a business
lawyers or a dentist if you start giving
something you get more so
this is the law i think if you give more
um you receive more and then there's one
more extra reason to appreciate about so
you you your life would shift so your
whole energy would be so different and
so content and i think people want to do
business with happier people you know
people don't want to go with people who
are very depressed so the people with
the radiance of appreciation often
attracts more people and more
opportunities so this is not a new age
or a spiritual thing it's a practice to
to
to appreciate more so what you
appreciate appreciates and i think it's
it's so simple so start appreciating
about money is the first step and then
start second step is start appreciating
what you have
and if you start sharing what you have i
call it gift
all of us have gifts i've written
probably like
half of my books 20 books on how to
discover your gifts and monetize them
because
we're born each of us is born with a
special gift and something to be shared
with this uh planet and if you can find
it and if you can uh improve it and you
can you can polish it and just
share with our society i think
that translates into money so i wrote a
national bestseller
do what you love and make sure money
follows you so it's very important you
have to have both
so talk to me about that so the hearing
you i've heard you say that before that
you've written
that many books on um finding your gifts
so one i'd like to know what that
process is i'm not a big believer and i
get this is um it'll be interesting to
see your take on this i'm not a big
believer that we're born with something
um
but i think that we can polish like
you're saying and really turn that into
something um how do people find it
and then how do they polish it
you know i taught
probably personally over hundreds of
thousands of people you know through
seminars and my coaching
i do a big events a few thousand people
at a time
and i do a lot of q as so i have this
track record of how people found their
gifts
and uh some people find them when
they're very young you know when you're
five or
six or seven you your neighbor finds out
that you're very good at chess and then
he ends up being being champion i've
interviewed a japanese champion once and
uh some geniuses are found that way but
most of us are not that way right we're
not olympic athletes or we're not
superstars so um most of us are not born
with only one gift
we were born with several mediocre gifts
like uh like i was i think i had i had a
gift of speaking i had a gift of
teaching i had the gift of making jokes
i make i make jokes all the time and
money could be very boring so and money
is there are so many funny stories
especially couples but anyway so you
know so there are many gifts small gifts
but you have to multiply them and then
you become one and only
so so i know where you're going with
that before we get to how you chain them
together
how do you find them because that what
you just said really resonates with me
you've got minor gifts mediocre gifts i
think was your exact phrase i love that
okay so you've got these mediocre things
inside of you how do you how do you find
them like i don't i don't know that
people and i know what you're the three
things that you chain together are and
that'll be really interesting to hear
you talk about that especially the third
one which haven't mentioned yet
um
how do people identify that and maybe
you walking us through how you found
your three will be super useful
so you know some people find it by
coincidence you know some people find
out that your your friend would say hey
ken you're good at speaking like
what you know because gifts are funny
thing it it comes so naturally out of
you so you don't even notice it so even
if you're good at singing you got
speaking you're good at connecting
people that's another gift yeah i think
you have the special gift of connecting
people too
so if you have even if you have so many
gifts you don't realize them unless you
you recognize them
and oftentimes
i do
guide
people to find their gifts and in the
process they realize like oh gee all
these years i've known that i had the
gift but i never recognized it as a gift
because how do you guide people through
that do you have them ask themselves
questions yes or survey their friends
some questions that people can go
through
literally a thousand yes so for example
one of the questions is like uh when uh
when you were small uh what what were
the nicknames and then the nicknames
have strong something
by the way my nickname was a teacher
because i was like teaching kids
other kids so like nicknames have
certain characteristics already or like
uh when your kids
what were you escorted
for when i was small my mother used to
say you know you talk too much don't
talk
that means i have the gift of talking
because i want to express myself so when
you're scolded about something that is a
gift
but you thought it's a negative it's
it's your
actually it's your flaws instead of
thinking it's a gift so there are
thousands of questions and then when you
just
show light on that you realize wow i
just never thought that i had so many
gifts and then once you kind of like
recognize one by one by one
and then start sharing um without
thinking much you know you don't have to
be at this point you don't have to be
strategic about uh what what's going to
happen because it's well you know fun
things will come out you never know
i've seen so many fun uh
miracles happening to people's lives so
you discover certain gifts and then
once you realize the gifts will come out
on its own it's a it's so interesting
organic mechanism that because you're so
inspired
by
uh sharing your gifts because more you
share your people love it love it and uh
you know your listeners who love your
shows they're waiting for your shows
they'll be upset if you just get a sick
leave or something right so that people
give you energy so once this cycle
starts and you appreciate them for
supporting you
it grows and grows and grows
exponentially and then when that happens
you don't want to stop
and then at some level it will translate
into money
so that's let's talk about that so there
there's a gap there that i think a lot
of people fall into and don't know how
to get out of so let's say that they
they do the exercise they you know think
about what they were into when they were
young they think about what they got
scolded for nicknames all of that stuff
just things that they find interesting
and they go okay cool these are the
things that i think that i'm it's a
mediocre talent but i'm willing to
polish it and make it bigger how do they
monetize that like how do they actually
turn that into money yeah so that is a
miracle and also a fun part of life
because you never know one of my
students was an insurance salesperson
and he didn't sell a lot because he
didn't want to push people i'm sure a
lot of people can relate to that and one
day he was he was told to do cold calls
he so he had to go to the one one big
house
where there was a german shepherd and
then
he knew that he loves dogs and you know
some people dog lovers dogs know you
know who they are so when he was uh in
the house and and he didn't and then he
says beware dog but he didn't really
care so the dog the dog didn't really uh
shout on him and bark at him and the
owner uh grandmother was so impressed
because everybody was harassed by this
dog you know mailman and a delivery man
and so she thought it's you know it's
interesting so why don't you come up to
my house and have a cup of tea
and then he was invited in and and then
she fell in love with this guy because
you know
whoever
her dog loves
this person means he's a good man
and then
she was a head figure in this
entire neighborhood so he could sell so
many insurance policies and later on he
found this dog club uh and then uh so
like
they do only barbecues you know they do
nothing but with dogs you know by the
riverside and they go on a trip and so
all he does is not selling insurance but
since he he has he's surrounded by so
many people you know there's a need for
insurance he gets it there's another
insurance
salesperson who she loved cooking so she
kind of like did the cooking classes
right for free
and
and the cooking classes grew and she
ended up being
the cooking class teacher but she sold
so many insurance policies on the way
and she found more passion in cooking so
he she quit the insurance business but
in the process of expressing and finding
who you are happy money follows you so
forget about money is that teaching but
you know at the same time don't forget
it completely you have to make both ends
meet so that's you know i have this
accounting consulting background so i'm
a very practical person so you have to
make sure all the bills are paid in
appreciation and at the same time
grow um your your energy
the most biggest problem that we have is
that we are depressed with our lives
so we don't have hopes we're not excited
about our lives that's why i think dude
talk to me about that so how do people
flip that around
you know um you have to take a look at
um life in a different perspective
that's why i'm teaching
uh for example
one of my uh in my seminars i take a lot
of questions and uh it was
thousands of people so in in the box so
i couldn't really see the the person who
asked me question and she said i'm too
old and she sounded very young and and i
couldn't i can't really see how old are
you and she said i'm 23.
and everybody's like
and then she said
i'm the oldest oldest person in college
everybody's like 19 20 and i'm i'm on
i'm an
old grandmother it's like people
laughing
and she felt uh she felt so old and
she's so out of date uh and
then i realized that i don't know who
how old you are but you're 35 45 55 25
or 5
you are the oldest
in your life
right so i heard a seven-year-old boy
saying like oh i'm getting old you know
so if you owe this at your age
and from your future you are the
youngest
looking back 10 years from now so you
are the oldest and youngest at the same
time so some people start old so don't
compare with other people
some people start young and then
successful in their 30s and 40s and they
collapse in their 50s so don't compare
yourself with other people just look at
yourself and focus yourself and if you
focus on who you are and what will come
out of you
your life
and uh the best thing i i can give you
is i want you to be curious about your
life you know what is inside me
that is going to be turned into money or
turn into something that will please and
entertain so many people and it could be
your writing could be your cooking could
be something else you know for me it was
speaking and writing i never knew i
could write and i could speak
until i was 33 or 4 when i started
writing so
you you you'd be surprised by yourself
i was surprised of myself like i didn't
like write and speak
so it's interesting there's there's a
few things in here that i want to try to
pull apart so
one is
peter thiel talks about competition
being for suckers and he says you want
to go somewhere where there's no
competition and you've talked about if
you identify
one gift you might not be unique maybe
there are a lot of people that share
that gift and then you said but if you
can find two or three gifts and you put
them together then you may be one of the
only and so you've said the gifts that
you had that you've taken the time to
polish are
you can write you can speak and you
consider yourself a healer and you said
once i put them together and and
if i misspeak how you define healer let
me know but you're saying i help people
heal their past traumas about money to
change the story the way that they think
about it and and i thought that's
actually really interesting and it does
make you an incredibly unique voice and
when i was first looking at you and and
researching you for the show it was like
that that puts him in this very unique
category unlike because i since the
economy has taken the hit that it's
taken
i've been trying to find people that
have a really useful voice in finance to
help the average person through this i
don't want to bring in high level
investors that are going to talk about
gold and all this it's like that
does not help the average person get
through what we're going through so
seeing you bring those three things
together in this incredibly unique way i
think is interesting so we've got that
the find your unique place and then
we've got this other concept you're
talking about which i think i think is
insanely important and i want to know if
to you these end up coming together
which is people are depressed about
their lives and they're depressed about
their lives because of how they look at
it the frame of reference the story
they're telling so this this is my
mission like getting people to reframe
their life is
like
what i think about day and night so how
do people you obviously gave us what
i'll call the tip of the iceberg just
now in terms of how they can begin to
reframe and get out but that unique gift
of of turning yourself into sort of a
unique commodity um do you see these
things coming together in any way yes i
think you said it so beautifully one of
my favorite seminars i do at least here
you know i do this is a retreat center i
have
is uh reading your life script
that means that you write yourself
yes or i don't know who wrote it but
definitely there is a life script when
you look at your life there are so many
a series of events that shifted your
life and also
made who you are and the most mostly
in
what i found is among all the negative
events that you had that your father was
killed and in war or you your your
parents got divorced or you got
sick when you were like eight or ten so
among all these negative events there is
a seed of your life purpose
so if you find your life purpose
you will be very different forever
because
once you know
you are born to do i mean not like a you
know almost like enlightenment but it's
like a slight enlightenment wow i think
i was born with these you know hard
hardships because
i think i maybe i meant to do this you
know i was in this abuse i was brought
up in this abusive environment my
father's wealthy
so he had money and fame but we are
miserable
so that's why that set me uh to this
journey to find happiness the quest for
happiness and money that turned me in
that that turned me who i am and that's
so i can you give us a little background
your the story with your dad i think is
is very very interesting you know my
father was a very successful accountant
and consultant so but he was a very
samurai type of guy he never cries he
never just smiles and just a very rigid
guy so i was in this environment where
we knew we we had money but we didn't
have the safety in our house
so
i really wanted to know why people are
messed up that way and then why can't we
we cannot find peace and happiness in
our inner um in our family so that was
the the real start of my own of my life
talk to me about the time that you
um came home and found your dad crying
yeah that that
that was super intense yes um
i think i was at eight or nine years old
when i came home and i saw my father
crying like a baby he was really crying
in in kitchen i was super surprised and
my my mother took me aside and just
explained what what was going on but i
was in total shock because i've never
seen my father a man crying
and my mother told me
that
my father's uh friend
not best friend and and his client
uh committed suicide and i sort of knew
what suicide mean
but uh it's not hit only his life he
killed his entire family and after he
killed himself we call it family suicide
and that was the first time i learned
about the term family suicide it was
very particular in japanese culture
in in in order to save uh his family
from the disgrace of bankruptcy he
killed an entire family
and also he killed himself
and he uh he came to my father a few
days before
to ask
for a loan and he had the money but he
didn't give it to him because
the money he loans to his client his
friend would go directly to loan sharks
so he was recommending to file
bankruptcy and after bankruptcy he was
going to give the money the money can be
used for the family
but he is a samurai guy but so he didn't
tell him that he has the money but he
said no i'm not gonna loan the money
so he regretted regretted regretted
after the family suicide and that really
triggered him into going into alcohol so
uh killing the entire family because of
money really scared me give me a lot of
nightmares for for days sometimes i i
still sometimes get that
when i hear you know news that somebody
lost jobs and
millions of people losing jobs so i'm
i'm feeling a little restless about
what's going on that's why i'm more
inspired to help other people to find
peace and happiness but
he really didn't recover from that and
he passed away 17 years ago
but um so but
i think my father's generation and my
grandfather generation
i feel like
they're giving me powers and an
inspiration to to for me to share what i
know what do you mean by that you're
saying in in that trauma in the way that
they got caught up in it that gives you
the power to yes because i i feel
interesting that's an interesting way to
frame it yeah i feel so much pain around
around him and i feel so much pain for
my grand grandfather who died when he
was 42 or 3 because of the war so this
uh three generations of uh unhappiness
and despair and anger and resentment
is all kind of like cleaned in me and
also gets healed and transformed and
become this uh
incredible amount of energy to to to be
able to support people that's why i
think my books uh have been sold
millions of copies because i love
to help people who are in anxiety fear
and uh resentment because
in some some uh area we are upset
about not being fair right so
but unless we heal this pain that's
inside it's nothing to do with money
it's nothing to do with what's going on
out there it's nothing to do with uh
politics
it's inside it's the wounds and the
money scars and and all the generational
block that uh
have have been handed down
from our parents and negative beliefs
around money and about life and work
but they're also handed down from our
grand grandparents right so it's being a
generational block
so if you can uh turn all the pain into
life force energy you know you feel this
inspire inspiration in you that will
keep you going so otherwise you have to
shut them off
otherwise you have to shut them off i
was what do you mean by that uh because
you don't want to do um you know uh i
know a friend whose father is also
alcoholic and he doesn't want to
remember any of his childhood he doesn't
want to just talk with his uh you know
father either forget about it or you
have to reframe it useful that's very
very interesting um you've actually
talked a lot about friends having a good
friendship network is actually more
valuable ultimately than having a lot of
money um i'm super that that is such an
interesting reaction to your daughter i
did not expect that um what are what are
some other elements of building friends
and then
i think it will help people why is
friendship more
protective maybe the right word than
money you know
i always talk about
how to melt money fear
i
told them i teach people
make friends because they are the asset
they are the insurance for you when and
the economic
economic economy breaks down
uh you know everybody has a friend who
can let you stay for a week or two
and uh i kind of like counted you know
just wrote down the names okay he's good
you know this guy is maybe two weeks you
know and then i i calculated more than
50 friends and then
i can stay
one friend at one week second second
week and then after 52 friends i can
come back to my friend number one and
say it's been a year how are you so i so
without any money i can
live forever i have enough friends who
can support me
so i have no fear and money because i
know somebody will just um take care of
me
and the feeling
uh i have no debt so i i'm not in an ear
of
i i don't plan to file bankruptcy but
even if i lose everything
i have so many friends and supporters
who can help me
so um
whatever happens to me
i feel somebody is gonna just catch me
protect me so if you have the feeling
that somebody will not let you fall
uh you feel safe
so it's not the government it's not your
insurance it's not the money in the bank
uh you know it's your friends and people
who care about you and
if you have a complete trust in in the
future
you don't have to worry about money you
know
people worry about money because they're
worried about no money situation and i
have interviewed so many millionaires
who happen to be in no money situation
many times and normally situation
doesn't kill you
worry about no money situation kills you
so i think you'll have to explain to
people the difference between no money
and being actually afraid of the no
money situation yes what do you mean by
that exactly so say uh you run out of
money cash right and then you have you
cannot pay the rent so you have to get
out of your apartment and you you say
file bankruptcy for example
so have being in normandy situation is
not comfortable
i've never been one uh because i've been
very careful but i've known uh people
and friends who who have been into the
situation they don't want to go back
there again but it didn't uh the
experience didn't kill them you know
it's kind of depressing but at the same
time
once you lose everything
you realize that so many people are kind
to you uh
one of my friends who filed bankruptcy
on the night
he got a call from these five friends
who just said
why don't you come to my house you know
have extra room and then he just cried
while he was on the phone
so people
when he was successful he didn't care
about friends his friends right he was
so like successful
but
uh people
are so obsessed almost like obsession
have this obsession of uh making sure
that they're they will not be in no
money situation that's why they're not
taking risks and start their own
businesses that's why they're not
leaving their jobs that's what they're
not leaving their husbands and wives
because they're so afraid that one day
you'll be in this normal situation which
is like
they're more afraid of no money
situation than death
so i'm just teaching people no money
situation is not
it could be a scary place but that could
be a great start for uh
financial independence so whenever i
get an email saying i found bankruptcy
two days ago
i was sent back an uh email saying
congratulations you are in the starting
point
toward financial independence because
they are
yeah i i think that reaction is really
really powerful and i've thought about
so and you talk about this pretty openly
just because i am wealthy today does not
mean that i'm going to be wealthy at 50.
so especially now in an economy where
something i could never have imagined is
happening you go hmm like nothing is
forever and one of the things and this
is bring it all back round to zen
where
what i found so intriguing about
buddhism was the revelation that life is
suffering and once you realize this is a
game so now i'm using my words i don't
know that any buddhist would ever say
what i'm about to say but this was my
interpretation of buddhism once you
realize that you're playing a game of
neurochemistry and when you suffer
because you want something or you're
trying to keep up with the joneses or
you have a negative story that you're
telling yourself about your own
self-worth because what your parents
said you're not worth the money or you
know they're shaming you for how you
spend your money or whatever the case
like whatever has happened to you
whatever wound you have like people
begin to to get a sense of self that is
about that wound and so they're not
feeling good and they they're trying
everything they can to escape that and
it's like okay what is the sort of
original
pro generator of this sense of suffering
desire right and so that buddhist notion
of desire gives birth to all of your
suffering and
understanding like the notion of
attachment and that when you are
obsessed with money rule number one
forget about money like if you really
want to make progress
that notion
is
so critical for people to understand
do to ask themselves what is the physics
of this situation the physics of this
situation is you're having a biological
experience your brain is kicking off
certain
neurotransmitters and
a cocktail of chemicals that makes you
feel a certain way either that certain
way feels good or that certain way feels
bad and really beginning to understand
what's happening inside your mind is the
very thing that manifests the good
feeling or the bad feeling okay well
great if this isn't about external
stimulus if it's not about i have a lot
of money and i feel good i have little
money and i feel bad and it's what am i
thinking and feeling inside myself and
how much control do i have over that
like you really begin to understand and
i look i think that the way you think is
only one part of the equation i don't
think that um wahey became
you know the warren buffett of japan
simply because he thought in positive
ways but it until you get that part
right
your
your behaviors just won't align with
anything useful
that's what i found myself drawn to in
your philosophy is that notion of taking
this
very zen
approach of having those realizations
about the way that this is a mental game
yes exactly you said it so beautifully
and uh culture difference too uh i've
been interviewed by so many different
people from different cultures uh one of
the most uh often asked questions in
america is like uh i i talk about money
container you know everybody's born with
a certain size money container it's what
i what i say and american people want to
know how can i make my money container
bigger so i can be wealthy so that is a
typical question i get from north
america so it's a totally different
approach
so uh it's a you know it's not good or
bad but if you just just totally shift
so i teach
japanese people more american way okay
you're okay you know don't be satisfied
dream big
for north american people maybe you
don't need a big house maybe you don't
need three cars you know you could
downsize and still find a fulfillment in
life too so you have to really kind of
like change perspectives so that way you
can really uh
find out who you are and uh without all
the toys
you can be still happy
and i think that's what everybody is
experiencing like what what do i let me
ask you
that i was literally going to ask you
that question so
in researching you i started thinking
what would i do if i lost all my money
[Music]
how would i find like my or how the way
that i think about how would i create my
a happy life
um
and i began to think about like what are
the things that cost very little money
but bring me an extraordinary amount of
joy what are those things for you
i think you know there are many bnb here
so
i want to be hired by somebody
in this bit
in the neighborhood
and then whoever comes in just i'll do
the chores and meanwhile i have a little
chat with them and then i i asked them a
few questions and then they get lit up
and like wow gee i want to go home and
stop my something so i just want to be a
like a old guy just sweeping floors
and just have a friendly chat
you know not as a famous person just a
just a regular guy
just exchanging ideas and then after 30
minutes of
friendly conversation he or she feels so
much lighter more fun
and more joyful and that's how who i
want to be
and i'm okay with a rice ball and
some fish or like some vegetables
i love that man that is fantastic
where can people um connect with you
so i have not much information yet in
english uh
you can find my google ken ken honda
h-o-n-d as in the car and ken honda.com
or i've been interviewed by somebody
like you um who are so um beautiful
so there are some youtube
videos that are
up and i am creating many uh free
content uh so how people can find gifts
and all that so i'm trying to uh
translate many of i have stacks of books
and also
many work and a lot of fun stuff so
being translated into english
i love it man
well ken thank you so much for joining
me on the show today um
really really incredible i think super
powerful and
i hope that people will dive in and
watch the videos which i have done
they're fantastic read the book happy
money fantastic um
thank you man all right guys if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care thank you so much as we leave
the perfection of childhood the hypnosis
and the brainwashing begins our
well-intentioned parents say
oh you want to be an astronaut you want
to start a business when you grow up you
want to paint like
joe michelle basquiat
be reasonable